[WIP] interim guidance on deploying to production environments (#838)
aws/karpenter: website/content/en/pre-docs/concepts/_index.md

---
title: "Concepts"
linkTitle: "Concepts"
weight: 35
---

Users fall under two basic roles: Kubernetes cluster operators and application developers.
This document describes Karpenter concepts through the lens of those two types of users.

## Cluster operator

As a Kubernetes cluster operator, you can engage with Karpenter to:

* Install Karpenter 

> * Configure provisioners to set constraints and other features for managing nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Configure provisioners
```

* Deprovision nodes
* Upgrade nodes

Concepts associated with this role are described below.

### Installing Karpenter

Karpenter is designed to run on a node in your Kubernetes cluster.

> As part of the installation process, you need credentials from the underlying cloud provider to allow nodes to be started up and added to the cluster as they are needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of the installation process, you need credentials (e.g. IAM) from your infrastructure provider to allow nodes to be started up and added to the cluster as they are needed.
```

[Getting Started with Karpenter on AWS](https://karpenter.sh/docs/getting-started/)
describes the process of installing Karpenter on an AWS cloud provider.

> Because requests to add and delete nodes and schedule pods are made through Kubernetes, AWS IAM Roles for Service Accounts (IRSA) are needed by your Kubernetes cluster to make privileged requests to AWS.

Reviewer: IRSA isn't a requirement but is recommended. Lots of people still use kube2iam or similar tools.

> For example, Karpenter uses AWS IRSA roles to grant the permissions needed to describe EC2 instance types and create EC2 instances.

Reviewer: This is a bit confusing because Karpenter doesn't use IRSA. Karpenter uses a Kubernetes service account mounted in the pod. How that service account get's access into AWS depends on the implementation.

> Once privileges are in place, Karpenter is deployed with a Helm chart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once privileges are in place, Karpenter can be deployed with a Helm chart.
```

### Configuring provisioners

Karpenter's job is to add nodes to handle unschedulable pods, schedule pods on those nodes, and remove the nodes when they are not needed.
To configure Karpenter, you create *provisioners* that define how Karpenter manages unschedulable pods and expires nodes.
Here are some things to know about the Karpenter provisioner:

* **Unschedulable pods**: Karpenter only attempts to provision pods that have a status condition `Unschedulable=True`, which the kube scheduler sets when it fails to schedule the pod to existing capacity.

* **Provisioner CR**: Karpenter defines a Custom Resource called a Provisioner to specify provisioning configuration.
Each provisioner manages a distinct set of nodes, but pods can be scheduled to any provisioner that supports its scheduling constraints.

> A provisioner contains constraints that impact the nodes that can be provisioned and attributes of those nodes (such timers for removing nodes).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A provisioner contains constraints that impact the nodes that can be provisioned and attributes of those nodes (such as timers for removing nodes).
```

See [Provisioner](/docs/provisioner-crd/) for a description of settings and the [Provisioning](/docs/tasks/provisioner.md) task for of provisioner examples. 

* **Well-known labels**: The provisioner can use well-known Kubernetes labels to allow pods to request only certain instance types, architectures, operating systems, or other attributes when creating nodes.
See [Well-Known Labels, Annotations and Taints](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/labels-annotations-taints/) for details.

> Keep in mind that only a subset of these labels are supported in Karpenter, as described later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keep in mind that only a subset of these labels are supported in Karpenter, as described in the [application developer section]({{< ref "#application-developer" >}}).
```

> * **Deprovisioning nodes**: A provisioner can also include time-to-live values to indicate when nodes should be deprovisioned after a set amount of time from when they were created or after they becomes empty of deployed pods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Deprovisioning nodes**: A provisioner can also include time-to-live (TTL) values to indicate when nodes should be deprovisioned after a set amount of time from when they were created or after they becomes empty of deployed pods.
```

Does TTL affect both total time a node can exist and how long it should stay after empty? I thought TTL only affected total life of a node before it would be destroyed.

Reviewer: I see my answer further below and realized you said "values" and not "value" which answers my question.

* **Multiple provisioners**: Multiple provisioners can be configured on the same cluster.
For example, you might want to configure different teams on the same cluster to run on completely separate capacity.

> One team could run on nodes nodes using BottleRocket, while another uses EKSOptimizedAMI.

Reviewer: Is the R in bottlerocket usually capitalized? All the branding I see is lower case but maybe the SSM search path is capitalized.

Although most use cases are addressed with a single provisioner for multiple teams, multiple provisioners are useful to isolate nodes for billing, use different node constraints (such as no GPUs for a team), or use different deprovisioning settings.

### Deprovisioning nodes

Karpenter deletes nodes when they are no longer needed.

* **Finalizer**: Karpenter places a finalizer bit on each node it creates.
When a request comes in to delete one of those nodes (such as a TTL or a manual `kubectl delete node`), Karpenter will cordon the node, drain all the pods, terminate the EC2 instance, and delete the node object.

> Karpenter handles all clean-up work needed to properly delete the node.

Reviewer: Including EBS volumes? If so we should add that because it's a question we get asked.

* **Node Expiry**: If a node expiry time-to-live value (`ttlSecondsUntilExpired`) is reached, that node is drained of pods and deleted (even if it is still running workloads).
* **Empty nodes**: When the last workload pod running on a Karpenter-managed node is gone, the node is annotated with an emptiness timestamp.
Once that "node empty" time-to-live (`ttlSecondsAfterEmpty`) is reached, finalization is triggered.

For more details on how Karpenter deletes nodes, see [Deleting nodes with Karpenter](/docs/tasks/delete-nodes.md) for details.

### Upgrading nodes

A straight-forward way to upgrade nodes is to set `ttlSecondsUntilExpired`.

> Nodes will be terminated after a set period of time and will be replaced with newer nodes.

Reviewer: Are there any safeguards against multiple nodes being terminated at once? If all my nodes are created at the same time will they all be destroyed at the same time too? Do we have a way to add jitter or skew to this TTL or locking to make sure the entire cluster doesn't recycle at once?

For details on upgrading nodes with Karpenter, see [Upgrading nodes with Karpenter](/docs/tasks/upgrade-nodes.md) for details.

Understanding the following concepts will help you in carrying out the tasks just described.

### Constraints

The concept of layered constraints is key to using Karpenter.

> With no constraints defined in provisioners and none requested from pods being deployed, Karpenter chooses from the entire universe of features available to your cloud provider.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With no constraints defined in provisioners and none requested from pods being deployed, Karpenter chooses from all available compute types that satisfy the pods requirements available in to your provider.
```
